# Big Picture
* Design
	1. Digital systems for implementing algorittms in circuits.
		* No software
	2. General purpose microprocessor design

# Contents
- Combinational and sequential components: review with added contents.
- Design of a digital system:
	- General datapath and Control circuits for implementing algorithms.
* Static and Dynamic Random Access Memories; SRAM and DRAM, memories on chip.
- Single-cycle and multi-cycle MIPS design for a limited set of instructions; Performance analysis.
- Exploring instruction level parallelism: instruction pipeline
- Cache memory
- ARM architecture

# Why Take This Course?
* To become a digital system designer.
* To know a low level programming language (Assembler)
* To prepare to elective courses: CPE 404 (Modern Processor Architecture), CPE 409 (Embedded DSP), and CPE 301 (microcontroller)
* To master CAD tools and HDL Verilog/SV.
* To write better codes for application by knowing the underlying hardware.
* To write the system software (OS, compiler, etc.)
* To know what can be expected in the future.
* To be a successful engineer.
* Because it is intellectually fascinating!

# Key definitions
* **Architecture:** Programmer's view of a computer
	* Defined by instructions & operand locations.
* **Microarchitecture:** specify the design of the computer modules with digital components and their **interfacing**.
* Microprocessors and Microcontrollers are both microprocessors. 
	* Microprocessor - for general purpose data crunching.
	* Microcontroller - to interface with transducers, peripherals for embedding into the system/process.
* Computer (microcomputer) = microprocessor plus peripherals for input/output, memory, graphics, mouse, printer, display, etc.
# Types of architecures
 * Reduced Instruction Set Computers: RISC
 * Complex Instruction Set Computers: CISC
 * Very large instruction word: VLIW

# Lecture 1
* Datapath architecture

# Digital System/Processor architecture
- Datapath
	- Responsible for transferring, storing and processing data, and thus includes registers or register file, ALU and more logic for moving data to proper circuits using multiplexers.
- Control unit
	- Provides control signal to the data path to move data and select an operation to perform cycle-by-cycle.
	- Can be purely combinational circuit, a sequential circuit or can use memory for reading a pattern of control signals (microcoding)
# Datapath Architecture
- Decision about how the datapath modules interface (interconnect) has a critical effect on the performanc and the cost of the design.
- A single bus ( a single port register file) and multi-bus or point-to-point connection with a multi-port register file are examples that interconnect.
- Many simple microcontrollers are designed with a single bus architecture, while a general purpose microprocessors favor a 3-port register file.
- Please note that the architecture of the processor and the architecture of thy system differ:
	- The processor can be designed based on a singel(local)

# How to connect logic/registers to a shared BUS
- When various circuits output to <u>a shared bus</u> 