A sentence that contains variables an **open sentence** or **predicate** and becomes a proposition only when its variables are assigned to specific values.
	For example, "$x\ge3$" is true when $x$ is given the value 7 and false when $x$ is 2.
- When $P$ is an open sentence with a variable $x$, the sentence is symbolized by $P(x)$.

The collection of objects that may be substituted to make an open sentence a true proposition is called the **truth set** of the sentence.
- Before a truth set can be determined, we must be given or must decide what objects are available for consideration; that is, we must have specified a **universe of discourse**.
In many cases the universe will be understood from the context.
- For the sentence "x likes chocolate." the universe is presumably the set of all people.
We will often use the number systems $\mathbb{N}$, $\mathbb{Z}$, $\mathbb{Q}$, $\mathbb{R}$, and $\mathbb{C}$ as our universes.

## Example. The truth set of the open sentence "$x^2<5$"
- The truth set of "$x^2<5$" depends on the collection of objects we choose for the universe of discourse. With the universe specified as the set $\mathbb{N}$, the truth set is {1,2}.
- For the universe $\mathbb{Z}$, the truth set is {-2, -1, 0, 1, 2}.
- When the universe is $\mathbb{R}$, the truth set is the open interval {$-\sqrt{5}, \sqrt{5}$}.

# Definition - Universe specified
With a universe specified, Two open sentences $P(x)$ and $Q(x)$ are **equivalent** if they have the same truth set.

## Example. Same Truth Set Different Universes
The sentences "$3x+2=20$" and "$x=6$" are equivalent open sentences in any of the number systems named above. On the other hand, "$x^2=4$" and "$x=2$" are *not* equivalent when the universe is $\mathbb{R}$. They *are* equivalent when the universe is $\mathbb{N}$.

# Definition - Existential Quantifiier
The symbol $\exists$ is called the **existential quantifier**. For an open sentence $P(x)$, the sentence $(\exists~x)P(x)$ is read "**There exists $x$ such that $P(x)$**" or "**For some $x$, $P(x)$**." The sentence $(\exists~x)P(x)$ is true if the truth set of $P(x)$ is *nonempty*.

An open sentence $P(x)$ does not have a truth value, but the quantified sentence $(\exists~x)P(x)$ does. One way to show that $(\exists~x)P(x)$ is true for a particular universe is to identify an object $a$ in the universe such that the proposition $P(a)$ is true. To show that $(\exists~x)P(x)$ is false, we must show that the truth set of $P(x)$ is empty.

## Examples. Let's examine the truth values of these statements for the universe $\mathbb{R}$:
(a) $(\exists~x)(x\ge3)$
- This statement is true because 3, 7.02, and many other real numbers are in the truth set of $x\ge3$.
(b) $(\exists~x)(x^2=0)$
- This statement is true because the truth set of $x^2=0$ is precisely {0} and therefore is nonempty.
(c) $(\exists~x)(x\ge3\land x^2=-1)$
-  Because the open sentence $x^2=-1$ is never true for real numbers, the truth set of $x\ge3\land x^2=-1$ is empty. The statement is false.
(d) $(\exists~x)(x\ge3\lor x^2=-1)$
- While there no real number that matches the open sentence $x^2=-1$, because of the $\lor~x\ge3$, there does exists an $x$ that is in the truth set, therefore, the statement is true.

The sentence "Every number $x$ is greater than 0" needs a different quantifier because it is not enough to find at least one value for $x$ for which "$x>0$" is true. The open sentence "$x>0$" must *always* be true--that is, true for every object in the universe. The sentence "Every $x$ is greater than 0" is true when the universe is $\mathbb{N}$ but is false when the universe is the integers ($\mathbb{Z}$).
# Definition - Universal quantifier
The symbol $\forall$ is called the **universal quantifier**. For an open sentence $P(x)$, the sentence $(\forall~x)P(x)$ is read **"For all $x$, $P(x)$"** or **"For every $x$, $P(x)$."** The sentence $(\forall~x)P(x)$ is true if the truth set of $P(x)$ is the *entire universe*.

## Example. Universe Quantifier Example
In the universe of natural numbers, the sentences $(\forall~x)(x+2>1)$ and $(\forall~x)(2x\text{ is an integer})$ are true. However, the sentence $(\forall~x)(x+2>1)$ is false in the universe of real numbers because $-5+2>1$ is false, and $(\forall~x)(2x\text{ is an integer})$ is false in $\mathbb{R}$ because 0.6 is not in the truth set.

The sentence $(\forall~x)(2x+1<6)$ is false in $\mathbb{N}$ because 3 is not in the truth set, and $(\forall~x)(2x-1>x)$ is false in $\mathbb{N}$ because 1 is not in the truth set. The two sentences are false in the universe of real numbers for the same reasons.

Some universally quantified sentences that are true in $\mathbb{R}$ are
$(\forall~x)(x<0\text{ or }x>0)$, $(\forall~x)(2^x>0)$, and $(\forall~x)(x+2>x)$.

There are many ways to express a quantified sentence in English. Look for key words such as *for all*, *for every*, *for each*, and similar words that require **universal quantifiers**. Look for phrases such as *some*, *at least one*, *there exist(s)*, *there is (are)*, and others that indicate **existential quantifiers**.
## Example. Apple
How should the sentence "All apples have spots" be written in symbolic form? If we limit the universe to just apples, a correct symbolization would be $(\forall~x)$($x$ has spots). But if the universe is all fruits, we need to be more careful.  Let $A(x)$ be "$x$ is an apple" and $S(x)$ be "x has spots." Should we write the sentence as $(\forall~x)[A(x)\land S(x)]$ or $(\forall~x)[A(x)\implies S(x)]$?
The first quantifiied form, $(\forall~x)[A(x)\land S(x)]$, says "For all objects $x$ in the universe, $x$ is an apple and $x$ has spots." Since we don't really intend to say that all fruits are spotted apples, this is not the meaning we want.
Our other choice, $(\forall~x)[A(x)\implies S(x)]$, is the correct one because it says "For all objects $x$ in the universe, if $x$ is an apple, then $x$ has spots." In other  words, "If a fruit is an apple, the in has spots."

In general,
- "All $P(x)$ are $Q(x)$" should be symbolized $(\forall~x)(P(x)\implies Q(x))$,
and
- "Some $P(x)$ are $Q(x)$" should be symbolized $(\exists~x)(P(x)\land Q(x))$.

## Examples. Translate each of these senteneces using quantifiers
### (a) "For every odd prime $x$ less than 10, $x^2+4$ is prime."
- The sentence means that if $x$ is prime, and odd, and less than 10, then $x^2+4$ is prime. It is written symbolically as
	$(\forall~x)(x\text{ is prime }\land x\text{ is odd }\land x<10\implies x^2+4\text{ is prime})$.
### (b) "Some functions defined at 0 are not continuous at 0."
- The sentence means that there exists some functions defined at 0 are not continuous. It is written symbolically as.
	$(\exists~f)(f\text{ is defined at }0\land f\text{ is not continuous at }0)$.
(c) "Some real numbers have a multiplicative inverse."
- This sentence means that there exist some real numbers that have a multiplicative inverse. It is written symbolically as.
	$(\exists~x)(x\text{ is a real number }\land~x\text{ has a real multiplicative inverse})$.
- However, "$x$ has an inverse" means there is some number that is an inverse for $x$ (hidden quantifier), so a more complete symbolic translation is
	$(\exists~x)[x\text{ is a real number}\land(\exists~y)(y\text{ is a real number }\land~xy=1)]$.
(d) "Some integers are even and some integers are odd."
- This sentence means that there are two open sentences in conjunction with one another.
	$(\exists~x)(x\text{ is even })\land(\exists~y)(y\text{ is odd})$.
## Example. The statement "For every rational number there is a larger integer" may be symbolized by
- $(\forall~x)[x\epsilon\mathbb{Q}\implies(\exists~z)(z~\epsilon~\mathbb{Z}\text{ and }z>x)]$
or
- $(\forall~x~\epsilon~\mathbb{Q})(\exists~z~\epsilon~\mathbb{Z})(z>x))$.
As was noted with the propositional forms, it is necessary to make a distinction between a quantified sentence and its logical form. With the universe all integers, the sentence "All integers are odd" is an instance of the logical form $(\forall x)P(x)$, where $P(x)$ is "$x$ is odd." The form itself, $(\forall x)P(x)$, is neither true nor false, but becomes false when "$x$ is odd" is substituted for $P(x)$ and the universe is all integers.

# Definition - Equivalence in a given universe
Two quantified sentences are **equivalent in a given universe** if they have the same truth values in that universe. Two quantified sentences are **equivalent** if they are equivalent in every universe.

# Theorem 1.3.1 - If $A(x)$ is an open sentence with variable $x$, then 
- (a) $\sim{(\forall~x)}A(x)$ is equivalent to $(\exists~x)\sim{A(x)}$.
- (b) $\sim{(\exists~x)}A(x)$ is equivalent to $(\forall~x)\sim{A(x)}$.
## Proof - Theorem 1.3.1
- (a) Let $U$ be any universe.
- The sentence $\sim{\forall~x}A(x)$ is true in $U$
	- iff $(\forall~x)A(x)$ is false in $U$
	- iff the truth set of $A(x)$ is not the universe
	- iff the truth set of $\sim{A(x)}$ is nonempty
	- iff ($\exists~x)\sim{A(x)}$ is true in $U$.

[[1.3 Quantified Statements#Theorem 1.3.1 - If $A(x)$ is an open sentence with variable $x$, then|Theorem 1.3.1]] is helpful for finding a a useful **denial** (that is, a simplified form of the negation) of a quantified sentence. In the universe of natural numbers, the sentence "All primes are odd" is symbolized $(\forall~x)$($x$ is prime $\implies x$ is odd). The negation is $\sim{(\forall~x)}$($x$ is prime $\implies x$ is odd). When we apply Theorem 1.3.1(a), this becomes $(\exists~x)[\sim{(x\text{ is prime }\implies x\text{ is odd})}]$. By [[1.2 Conditionals and Biconditionals#Theorem 1.2.2|Theorem 1.2.2]](c) this is equivalent to $(\exists~x)[x\text{ is prime }\land\sim{(x\text{ is odd})}]$. We read this last statement as "There exists a number that is prime and is not odd" or "Some prime number is even."

# Definition - Unique existential quantifier
The symbol $\exists !$ is called the **unique existential quantifier**. For an open sentence $P(x)$, the sentence $(\exists !x)P(x)$ is read **"There is a unique $x$ such that $P(x)$."** The sentence $(\exists !x)P(x)$ is true if the truth set of $P(x)$ has *exactly one element*.

# Theorem 1.3.2 - If $A(x)$ is an open sentence with variable $x$, then
- (a) $(\exists !x)A(x)\implies(\exists~x)A(x)$.
- (b) $(\exists !x)A(x)$ is equivalent to $(\exists~x)A(x)\land(\forall~y)(\forall~z)[A(y)\land A(z)\implies y = z]$.
Part (a) of [[1.3 Quantified Statements#Theorem 1.3.2 - If $A(x)$ is an open sentence with variable $x$, then|Theorem 1.3.2]] says that $\exists !$ is indeed a special case of the quantifier $\exists$. Part (b) says that "There exists a unique $x$ such that $A(x)$" is equivalent to "There is an $x$ such that $A(x)$ and if both $A(y)$ and $A(z)$, then $y=z$." 