# Introduction
Public projects are projects that are conceived, financed and operated by federal, state, county or local government agencies. Such projects include, for example, highway and other infrastructure projects, dam projects, water reclamation projects, etc. Unlike private projects which are normally motivated by profit making, public projects are normally designed to improve the welfare of society. These projects have special characteristics that make them more challenging to perform economic evaluation compared to private projects.

Why is economic analysis of such public projects more challenging than private sector?
# 11.1.2 Key Issues in Analysis of Public Projects
## 1. Impact on wider society
While private investments are normally designed only few individual investors with the primary objective of maximizing profits, public projects are normally carried out by public government agencies for the benefit of a much wider population. This poses several challenges, including
- **Identification and quantification of project benefits and costs**
Identification and quantification of project benefits and impacts to society can be very challenging. Think of public projects such as highways, airports, public parks, schools. Although it may be relatively easy to qualitively identify the benefits of such project to society, quantifying the benefits in dollar terms in order to provide econocim justification is often a big challeng. For example, a highway project that is expected to reduce fatalities and injuries: how do you quantify the benefits of those reduced fatalities and injuries, i.e., what is the "value of life" or economic costs of injuries? Such a project may also result in negative impacts, such as additional vehicle emissions, noise pollutions and other environmental impacts. How does one balance between the benefits and the negative impacts (often referred to as disbenefits)? Such issues are very common especially in big infrastructure projects.

- **Conflicting viewpoints and impacts between stakeholders**
The saying "One man's food, is another man's poison" often applies to public projects. Meaning that a project may be viewed as beneficial by a certain group in society while another group may view is not beneficial, or may view it as having negative consequences. Examples of potential conflicting viewpoints include:
	- **businesses vs general public**
Example: New highway through a neighborhood: Businesses may like it due to increased access that may attract more business, while residents may not like it due to increased traffic, noise and other associated traffic impacts.
	- **businesses vs environmentalists**
	- **users vs non-users**
Examples: Transit improvements: transit riders vs car users;
		- Freeway expansion: automobile owners vs non-owners
	- **property owners vs non-property owners**
	- **the poor vs the rich**
	- **the old vs the young**

## 2. Project Objectives
Public projects are often big projects with multiple objectives, and some of the objectives may be conflicting, making project design, analysis and evaluation more complex (read example of dam project in **section 10-4**).
## 3. Length of life cycle of projects
Public projects are often very long, with a lot of uncertainty on estimates of future costs and benefits. For example, dam projects may have 50 or even 100 year planned service life and therefore estimating related costs that far into the future can be quite a challenge.
## 4. Determination of MARR (Section 10.6)
Determination of the value MARR to use for public projects is also challenging. Unlike private projects which are normally motivated by profit making, public projects are motivated by improving society well being. As such the values of MARR used for public projects are generally lower than for private investments. Often the following three factors are used in determining the MARR
- Opportunity cost to taxpayers
- Opportunity cost of government
- Interest rate on borrowed capital
# 11.1.3 Economic Evaluation Methodology
Government agencies in the USA normally prefer the benefit-cost ratio method for evaluating of the public projects. Remember, when using the benefit-cost ratio method, an incremental analysis has to be performed. Since public projects are designed to benefit society as a whole, the following is the preferred definition of the B/C ratio for public projects, i.e.
	$B/C = \frac{\text{Incremental project (benefits - disbenefits) to society}}{\text{Incremental project costs to the government agency}}$
Benefits are the positive impacts that a project has on society, i.e., these are impacts of the project that improve the welfare of society. For example, a road improvement project will benefit society by reducing vehicle travel times, accidents, fuel consumption and vehicle operating costs. On the other hand, "disbenefits" are negative impacts of the public projects, meaning they degrade the welfare of the society in one way or another. For example, the road improvement project cited above may have negative impacts such as increased vehicle emissions, energy consumption, noise pollution and other environmental impacts. All these benefits and disbenefits have to be converted into equivalent dollar amounts, with benefits represented by positive cash flows, while disbenefits are negative cash flows. The costs to the responsible government agency, which are normally placed in the denominator of the B-C function, include the costs of planning, design and construction of the project, as well as the operation and maintenance costs over the life of the project.